Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dis Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lopez,
and today I'm joined by a return guest, Doctor
Owen Flanagan. He is James B. Duke, Distinguished Professor
Emeritus of Philosophy at Duke University. And today we're
going to talk about his latest book, What is
it like to be an Addict? Understanding Substance Abuse.
So, Doctor Flanagan, welcome back to the show. It's
always a pleasure to everyone.
Likewise for me, Ricardo, it's always nice to see
you.
So why did you decide to write a book
on addi addiction? I mean, does it relate in
any way to the rest of your body of
work?
Yes, thank you for that question. Um, SO, um,
well, it was a complicated both scholarly and Um,
personal decision. And, uh, so the, you know, the
main part of the backstory is that I was
addicted to alcohol and to benzodiazepine, so kind of,
uh, anxiety for, for your listeners who aren't up
on these things. The benzodiazepines are drugs like Valium
and Ativan, and lorazepam, Xanax. Um, MY favorite was
something called clonazepam. Uh, BUT I was also, uh,
a, uh, alcoholic and, uh, addicted to, uh, alcohol.
Um, uh, FOR, uh, for about 20 years of
my adult life, I haven't used either one for
18 years now. Um, BUT I struggled like a
lot of people. And your listeners may or may
not know about, at least in North America, and
I think this is true of Portugal and other
countries. Uh, ADDICTIONS, uh, probably about 1 in 5
people, uh, uh, in the North Atlantic countries, uh,
overall suffer from some kind of substance addictions in
their lifetime. Um, AND about half of them get
over them, about half of them don't, and, uh,
go to their graves, uh, with a substance abuse
problem. Of course, for many of those people, They
lose jobs, they lose friendships, they lose loved ones,
they lose sometimes pretty much everything. Um, I didn't
lose everything, but I lost a lot of things,
and I, um, I wasn't always responsible in my
relationships, um, uh, because of my addictions. So, that
was the personal side. Of course, that's embarrassing. So
I didn't want to talk about that. And, uh,
uh, and a large part of my, uh, drinking,
uh, life in particular. Uh, WAS either hanging out
with people who like to drink like me, that
is excessively, or by staying away from people who
didn't like to drink like me and who I
didn't want to know, uh, uh, that I had
any kind of problem. So, that's the sort of
personal side. But on the other side, here I
was, a philosopher who worked, uh, in the philosophy
of mind. I mean, so I was on the
one hand, Between my work and philosophy of mind,
my interest in consciousness, self-knowledge, um, uh, the relationship
of the mind and the brain. Um, YOU know,
this is a huge part of my work from
the very, very beginning. Uh, I also did a
lot of work early on, starting in the 80s.
On the ways in which different psychological models explain
things. So, of course, we know that there are
computational models of mind. There are neuroscientific models of
mind. There are psychoanalytic models of mind, the gestalt
theories of mind. There are behavioristic theories of mind
which emphasize reinforcement. So I kind of knew that.
I also, uh, have done a lot of work,
as you know, cause we talked about this on
the emotions. So I'm very interested in the ways
in which we humans are not merely cognitive machines
or computational machines, uh, but we are emotional engines,
like Spinoza said, we're driven by coattas, by urges,
by. So, here I was, I felt perfectly positioned.
Uh, TO, uh, write a book which was both
scientifically literate about the latest in what the psychologists,
sociologists, anthropologists, and neuroscientists think about addiction, and I
had the insider point of view. Um, AND I
thought it, it's something I almost felt duty bound
to do.
Right. Is there a definition of addiction and does
it, do we need one single definition of addiction
or not?
Yeah, I don't think we do. Now, you may
know, um, and, uh, I think again it's helpful
to your listeners even, um, is that, uh, there
are people who are definition mongers in general, and
sometimes philosophers are definition mongers. They'll say, you know,
we're not gonna talk about such and so until
we have a definition of it. I, what I've
decided, uh, and, and by the way, in addition
to that, there are people who think that the
word addict is, is self-stigmatizing or and the stigma
stigmas are inherently bad things. We can talk about
that later. I think, I think some things are
stigmas, which just means, of course, a mark. And
they are marked because they are negative, both from
the point of view of the person who is
at work has the problem, in this case, addiction,
and from the larger community that has to deal
with them, workers, loved ones, family, etc. Um, THAT
said, um, the, what, what I, what I think
is, uh, suits, uh, uh, so I, I like
the word addiction. I think that we, it's a
little bit like people in who are addicts. We
will often say, for us, it's like gay. It's
a word that we'll embrace. We are or were
one of those. Um, AND, uh, you can try
to change the name, you can call it something
else, you can call it substance abuse, substance misuse,
those are common, uh, locutions that are used lately.
And in fact, by the way, just as an
aside, before I answer your definition question. There was
an amusing report by the Surgeon General of the
United States a few years ago on addiction in
America. And it started out talking about addiction, but
then a few pages in, it said, but addiction
is now considered stigmatizing. So we are switching the
word to substance abuse. And then 10 pages later,
they said, substance abuse is now considered stigmatizing, so
we're changing the word to substance misuse. Anyway, I
just find this ridiculous and very amusing because if
you keep trying to get rid of stigma or
negative judgment for addiction, it'll continue forever because it
is just a negative state. OK. So that's all
I've said so far, it's a negative state. How
do you define it though? I think the best
way to think about it and what I talk
about in the book. Is that the diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association has 11
criteria for what it calls substance abuse. Two of
them involve what some people think is the definition
of addiction. Which is simply increased tolerance and physical
dependency on the drug. That won't work for lots
of reasons. First of all, many, many drugs that
are not particularly addictive. Um, IN the sense that
people will abuse them and mess up their entire
lives, people do become dependent upon. So anybody who
takes an SSRI, that is a, uh, antidepressant of
that class, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Uh, CAN'T go
off them right away or they'll have terrible side
effects. So you have to titrate down. So those
are drugs that people are physically dependent on, but
we wouldn't talk about people as addicts. Almost no
one goes out and tries to score, uh, you
know, uh, Paxil or, uh, Prozac on the streets.
Um, SO we need something stronger than that. What
are, what are the things we usually need? Well,
the other criteria are things like, you're obsessing about
the drug of choice a lot. You're planning to
get it, you're strategizing about how to get it.
And then the real kickers are when you cross
over and start to undermine your interpersonal relations because
of using in a way that the addict herself
recognizes, uh, and you start to not, uh, not
step up to your responsibilities at work and so
on and so forth. So, what I call, I,
I think of addiction as a sliding scale. Uh,
IF you have the 11 criteria in the psychiatric
manual, if you get to about 5 or 6,
if you get to 4 or 5, you have
probably a moderate substance abuse problem. And if you
get to 5 or 6, then I think you're
a bona fide addict, although you could also just
say you have a severe substance misuse problem.
But what kind of phenomenon is addiction? Is it
a disease, a disorder, a dysfunction? What is it
exactly? Good. So, uh, these words, Ricardo, are exactly
what are used. Some people also use syndrome, some
people even say it's just a habit, it's just
a form of habit learning like anything else is.
You know, if you're a good soccer player and
you, you know, uh, then what you've developed are
well honed habits. But some habits are bad, like
if you are a bad, if you're a criminal
who, uh, loves to break and enter houses and
steal things, well, you've got a bad habit. So
addiction, some people think it's even just like that.
It's something you've acquired and learned and perfected over
time. OK, but the main candidates for the discussion
are disease, Dysfunction and disorder, as you put it.
I prefer disorder um for the following sorts of
reasons. So let's start with disease. So, there, again,
uh, just like with addiction, there's no actually perfect
definition of any of these concepts, but at least
one paradigm case of disease, uh, or paradigm cases
of diseases would be things like if a person
goes in for a colonoscopy and finds out they
have colon cancer. They have a disease. The disease
is colon cancer. If as a child, they go
for blood work and the doctor says you have
type one diabetes, that is a disease. The disease
of diabetes, type one diabetes is caused by insufficient
production of insulin by the pancreas. Colon cancer is
caused by cancer in the colon. Now when addicts
talk about their problem, their addiction. They, and they
use the language of disease at all, which is
not all that common. They will draw the analogy
to what's, that is to type 2 diabetes. Now,
that's interesting because type 2 diabetes is considered a
disease, but it's a complicated and interesting disease because
it's not something you're born with, it's something you
develop and can take control of by changing diet
and exercise. It doesn't always fix it 100%, but
it's a way to mitigate it. So, that's an
interest, so I think that's the right kind of,
if you're gonna use disease talk, that's an appropriate
analogy. It's a funny kind of disease where the
agent himself participates in, as it were, the acquisition
of the disease and can also get back in
and take action to take himself out of the
disease. So you could call it a disease. I
wouldn't, I wouldn't fall over and cry if people
want to call it a disease, but I think
because there is no anatomical location that's ever been
discovered yet for addiction, that, and there's no place
like the pancreas that occurs. People will say that
addiction is a brain disease. That is one major
model. But as I discussed in the book. There
isn't one brain disease that has been located yet
that is addiction. There isn't one area that is
responsible for opiate addiction. There isn't one disease that
is alcohol addiction. There isn't one disease that is,
uh, uh, amphetamine addiction. It looks now to almost
all credible neuroscientists, as if 18 different areas of
the brain are involved and 100 different neurotransmitters. So
it's quite holistic. And that also usually means, I
mean, there are some diseases which are systemic like
that, so it doesn't rule it out as a
disease. But I think that the main way to
think about, um, addiction, the best way is as
a disorder. Um, AND what's disordered? Something about the
agents, um, plans for her life and how she
wants to live it, uh, goals she has. And
even Decisions she makes, so it's some kind of
self-control disorder because the addict will often say, damn
it, I'm not gonna use, and then they use
5 minutes later. So that's very puzzling. Because with
most cases of life, if you make a decision,
like you want to go to the movies, then
you go to the movies. Or if you decide
not to go to the movies, you usually have
good reasons not to go. Um, BUT addicts will
make a decision one second against using and then
find themselves using 5 minutes later. So that's, so
it looks like a disorder, uh, that involves what
philosophers might call the will, although no neuroscientists or
psychologists talk about the will anymore. So there's, there's
other ways that we need to think about it.
But I, I guess, you know, my general thinking
is that it's, it, it matters some. Uh, IN
the contemporary context, whether we want to call it
a disease because people will say, well, diseases are
things that people shouldn't feel guilty or responsible for,
and that will help remove stigma, but it just
never happens that it removes stigma, and there is
no disease that's been located.
In the book, at a certain point, you refer
to addiction as a psychobiological behavioral disorder. What does
that mean?
Good. So, it's an attempt to, to, so here's
what I see in the literature and why I
call it a psycho biosocial. So there was in
1997, the head of the National Institute of uh
Drug Abuse in America, uh, a gentleman named James
Lesher wrote a very influential paper paper called Addiction
is a Brain Disease and It Matters. And that
led, at least in the United States, to a
funding model, which pretty much guarantees that you can
only get funding if you say things like addiction
is a brain disease, and I'm trying to hunt
down where that disease is in the brain. But
as I said, 40 years out, no one has
found Any disease in the brain, what we find,
of course, we, it's guaranteed, by the way, we're
gonna find for any human behavior, we're gonna find
all kinds of stuff going on in the brain.
It's just guaranteed. So, the fact that we find
a bunch of stuff going on in the brain
of addicts is no more interesting than we find
a lot, bunch of stuff going on in the
name in the brains of football players or artists
or anything else. It could have been the case
that we would find very specific locations for aspects
of addiction. And some people do think that we're,
we're finding some, uh, locations where craving seems to
occur. That might be an interesting location. And some
people are working on medications to help with the
craving part once an addiction is up and running.
But the reason I call it psychosocial behavioral is
first of all, addiction clearly isn't just in the
brain because it involves people actually using, usually, I
mean, they're doing things in the world, like people
are going out. And sometimes with urgency trying to
score drugs. Um, SO there's behavior involved. They're injecting
drugs into their veins. They're snorting drugs, they're smoking
drugs. They're doing all kinds of behaviors in the
world. Uh, NOW, the acquisition process depends a lot
on which drugs are available in the culture. And
which ones are priced right? Now, free is the
best, right? So if your friends have a joint
and they're gonna share with you the joint for
free, that's just, that's a pretty good situation. Uh,
AS the price goes up on marijuana, Fewer people
use it. The price goes really high, dealers are
doing really well, but then people who use pot
have to get money to buy it. Alcohol, of
course, universally tends to be authorized by the culture,
at least up to a point. Is it priced
right? It just depends on how much money, what
your income is. Some people, money is no object,
other people, it's an object. So there's a lot
of research that shows that sort of socially, what
you can do is if you look in different
places in the world, you'll find that different drugs
are the drugs of choice among young people, it'll
vary. So, for example, in America, we have, uh,
uh, amphetamines are often used in agricultural communities because
the work is so hard and you have to,
uh, really be ready to get up in the
morning and get up and go. Um, uh, um,
uh, ALCOHOL, of course, is the, the most widespread
one. Uh, MARIJUANA, you know, it depends on the
culture. Young kids, now it's legalized in certain places.
I don't know about Portugal. In America, in many
states, we can have legal access to marijuana. So,
these all are the sort of social background in
terms of what makes drugs attractive, which ones the
kids are using, which ones the adults are using.
And those vary hugely. And they also vary by
country, um, uh, uh, and in, in, in interesting
ways. I mean, you see, for example, the highest
rates of male alcoholism are in countries like Russia,
South Korea. It's an interesting one. Uh, uh, THERE'S
no country in which women, so this is another
sort of, uh, sort of cultural aspect. There's no
country now in which women use alcohol more than
men. But there's some evidence that starting with COVID,
teenage girls in America were using drugs and alcohol
more than boys. So that's a demographic issue that
we'll have to watch for. And clearly, those demographic
issues are not in the brain. They're not, as
it were. So they're all determined by large social,
um, uh, factors beyond a person. And then the
psychological part is just that addictions have, even if
these things are, uh, occur in brains, addictions have
very, very familiar to addicts, parts, components that involve
obsessing about the drug of choice. Craving the drug
of choice, strategizing about when you're gonna get it,
tamping down, uh, motivation. So there's a whole internal
psychological system that's up and running with respect to
addicts. And then there are all the effects on
self-esteem, self-respect, shame, and guilt, and these all have
to be, these are partly culturally determined.
So let me ask you now a question about
a topic that you alluded to briefly earlier. Does
the use of the word addict promote social stigma?
Yes, maybe, but here's the rub. So, I think
that, uh, and, and I'm still thinking about this,
so this is a remaining research topic for the
future for me. But I worry a lot about
what I call, you know, sort of glib inferences
that go like this. Oh, I know how to
solve the problem with the fact that alcoholics and
drug addicts are stigmatized. Let's call it a disease.
Let's even say it's a disease, let's even believe
it's a disease, and then the stigma will go
away. Now, I think there's several problems here. First
of all, let's just reflect for a minute on
what stigma means. Uh, IT just means mark. Right,
so to have a, for somebody to have a
stigma attached to it or to be stigmatic, putting
aside, you know, religious imagery of Jesus' stigmas, uh,
uh, the marks of the crucifixion, just means that
it's marked as undesirable. I think we should take
sort of a low level first. So all that
would mean, for example, is that the behavior in
question, in this case we'll say associated with addiction.
I marked as undesirable. Now, I have trouble imagining
a world in which addiction will not be marked
as undesirable. And, and including on, not only on
the part of people who are not addicts, because
they know, for example, that if they have an
addict who works for them, The probabilities, the base
rates are that they'll be less reliable than their
other employees. They'll have more absenteeism, not that they'll
know that it's due to their addiction, but because
the addict will get sick sometimes and call in
and say that they're have an illness, but what
they have is an illness due to their addiction.
Um, ADDICTS, uh, tend not to be reliable partners
in romantic relationships, in marriages. They tend to have
more trouble sustaining parental roles. And so on and
so forth. So the first point to make is
that not all stigmas. ARE unwarranted. Uh, SO it's
not even clear what the request that you remove
all stigma from, and then you fill in the
blank. So, did you say, so you, so imagine
someone says, so addict is very stigmatic. Let's call
these people instead people with the disease of addiction.
So suppose we did that, or the disease of
substance abuse. It would still be the case that
those people are unreliable. Right. And so then we
would just switch to say. My friend Ernie has
the disease of substance addiction. Say, oh, I was
thinking of hiring Ernie, you know, to, uh, for,
for a job, and you think, uh, maybe not.
So I'm not sure that there's any mistakes being
made about marking addiction as undesirable. And from the
first person point of view, Ricardo, addicts don't like
it usually when they're addicted. There are people I
call in the book willing addicts. They enjoy the
life, they can live it with impunity. They can
score, you know, the highest level of heroin, maybe
they're billionaires. Anyway, life is OK for them. That's
a small group of people. But for most addicts,
but for most addicts, you don't have either a
first personal or a third personal judgment that this
is an OK way to be. Um, SO, I
do think understanding more and more the difficulties that
addicts have in controlling their behavior and being compassionate
and sympathetic towards them is important, but I don't
think that removing the stigma. Is in the cards,
nor actually do I think. We should. Mm. That's
so radical position. I know
that. No, no, I, I mean, that's, that's interesting.
So do you think that social stigma then it
can play or actually plays a role in fighting
against addiction?
Well, this is a good question, and we don't
have the test case to know, like it would
be, but I do think the answer looks to
be yes. So let me give one example. So,
um, there's a wonderful book by um uh George
Valiant, who was a Harvard psychiatrist. He graduated from
Harvard 75 years ago. I think, I think he's
still alive. He wrote a book called The Natural
History of Alcoholism. And he was doing a study
of all his classmates for Harvard. They were all
men in those days. Um, AND he has just
been gathering data over time, and he's noticed various
things. So one thing he noticed, not surprisingly in
that group, was that many of these men started
to have problems with alcohol in their 30s and
40s. Many of them also seem to get out
of those problems. Around the time that they get
into them. As, as he puts it, as the
responsibilities of family and work. Made the two incompatible.
But what he points out is that he says,
I don't see any personality traits. I don't see
any other traits that are, you know, aligned with
addiction, but there is one thing, which is that
if you come from an ethnic group where there's
a lot of joking about adult Alcoholism. That increases
the chances that you will become one. So that
means to relation to your question about stigma, that
in groups that don't stigmatize at all, adult drunkenness,
you'll get more adult drunks. Hm. That's interesting, right?
So, I don't know if that's a universal generalization,
but the point is, so what he found is,
he uses that to explain, so, so for example,
the high rate of uh uh alcoholism among Irish
Americans. So for example, and he finds that there's
a lot of joking about uncles who, you know,
go off the wagon and do stupid things. But
that joking itself. Um, CAN open, uh, the possibility
space for enacting going off in these dopey silly
ways that people do. Right. So the answer I
think might, it might be yes. At least making,
um, I mean, here's an interesting uh question. I
think that at least in the culture that I
live in in America, It's always been the case
that there is not much of a stigma attached
to teenagers experimenting with whatever drugs there are in
their world. It's sort of almost expected, so there's
not a stigma attached to it. The parents wish
their kids didn't use drugs early on. But if
you're an American kid, you know that your kids
will use pot and drink before they're legally allowed
to. It's just gonna go with the territory. I,
so I think that parents will then call the
kids in and say, I really wish you didn't
do this. I wish you waited until later so
you could do it responsibly, and so on and
so forth. They're very concerned about their kids becoming
abusers or addicts or getting into accidents. Um, SO
I think what, you know, it's a complicated parental
role, especially when the drugs of choice are ones
that the parents themselves use. But usually, the parents
try to create a normative system which says there
are lines that you don't cross, um, uh, and
that will be stigmatized. But, um, but experimentation among
the young, I think is sort of Pretty much
generally accepted as something that will happen and it's
not particularly stigmatized, unless the kid starts to become
a drug dealer or has an addiction problem, and
then it is. Mhm.
No, I, I mean, that, that was a very
interesting point and the reason why I wanted to
ask you about it is because, of course, if
Uh, to know if, if something works or not
against a particular kind of social problem in this
case, addiction. I mean, we have to really know
what works and what doesn't, and one of the
things that can or cannot work is social stigma
and I was also thinking about The case of
Japan, where, of course, these are two different things.
I'm going to talk about obesity now obesity is
different from substance abuse, but either way, I mean,
in, in East Asia, Japan, more specifically because they
are more collectivistic and so on. Um, THEY don't
have, uh, uh, any problem with, uh, openly talking
bad about, uh, fat people, obese people, and actually,
The rates of obesity in Japan are much, much
smaller than in the West. I mean, of course,
that's just a correlation, but still there since there's
that cultural difference and there, uh, and there's a
much heavier social stigma in Japan against being fat
or obese. I mean, there, um there might be
something there. I don't know.
Yeah, no, that's a nice example, right? Because, yeah,
and notice, I mean, it is true, you know,
that the weight thing is an interesting case that
you bring up. I like that because I, you
know, my impressions off the top of my head
are, you know, we have in America now, people
are saying 60%, 50 or 60% of people are
overweight and according to some medical standard or other.
I don't know what percentage are obese. And so
then we've tried to meet that. With body positivity
movements which removed the stigma, as it were, or
the, the ideal of a, you know, a thin
body, we'll say. That's an interesting movement which has
helped, I think, probably to a point people who
are overweight, shall we say, uh, to feel better
about themselves. I can see how that would work.
Um, uh. Yeah, again, it, you know, one could
imagine, and in fact, you know, we'll talk about
this, people, countries that use harm reduction techniques and
of course, Portugal, as you know, was one of
the leading places in the world in 2001. Um,
THAT, um, starting in 2001, that the ideas behind
harm reduction were both harm reduction and helping addicts
not feel as demoralized and to also be safer
than they are. Does that remove the stigma? To
a certain extent it probably removes some of the
excessive stigma or unnecessary stigma. So I, I have
no doubt, even though I say I don't see
how you can remove all the stigma or that
you would want to, I do agree that there
are ways in which it's just entirely counterproductive plus
cruel. To excessively shame, guilt trips, stigmatize addicts. That
almost goes without saying. But I think the mistake
at the other end is to think, oh, we
should just remove all negative judgments about drug abuse.
I think that would be a, a funny, uh,
a funny thing to want or to expect.
Uh, OK, so, can addicts stop being addicts?
Good. So this is an interesting thing, uh, again
that would uh push against the brain disease model
or the disease model. You can't stop being a
type one diabetic by willing. Or by changing your
behaviors. In other words, you can't just decide. Damn
it, pancreas start producing insulin. They just won't do
it. Um, YOU'LL have to take insulin from the
outside. You can't just get rid of colon cancer.
Um, uh, BUT there are things that could be
done. In both cases, you can have interventions that
maybe will cure you or maybe make it manageable.
What's interesting about addictions is that every day in
every country on earth. People do, sometimes, sometimes the
action is one of, it looks like a standard
case of will, a person just says. I can't
do this anymore, and they are able to stop
using. Sometimes forever. So that's an interesting thing. Most
diseases are not like that, right? So it's a
very puzzling, it's very puzzling. Now, some habits are
like that, so you might say, well, a habit
model will work there because sometimes people do, well,
people stop the cigarette habit and that's an addiction.
Sometimes they do it in one day. There are
Um, But a lot of people who, about half
the people who have at least alcohol or narcotic
addiction in the United States do go for some
kind of social help. And but what I mean
by social is they join. A fellowship like Alcoholics
Anonymous. Or Narcotics Anonymous, where they go and they
sit with other people. Who have the same problem.
And they try to help each other not to
use. That works. The data are pretty much in
that works about as well, a little better actually,
the data are, than any therapeutic techniques that you
pay actual money for. In other words, it works
as well as cognitive behavioral therapy. In fact, I
think it is a form of cognitive behavioral therapy.
It works as well as uh various other ones
which we can if you want to talk about
them. But there are other techniques that are used
all in the sort of what you might call
broadly psychotherapeutic. Um, CAMP. They're not typically drug use
ones, although there are some drugs which can help
with the cravings, as I mentioned. Um, BUT people
do, uh, get better. Uh, IT looks like some
people say as many as 50% of people who
use drugs get better. Uh, WHAT get better means,
some of them moderate. Uh, THEIR use, especially of
alcohol, um, some people moderate their use of other
drugs, although that can be harder. Um, BUT yes,
people do get better, um, uh, uh. But not
all people get better. Right.
Uh, AND why is it important to listen to
addicts? Why do we also need a subjective account
of addiction to have, I mean, I, of course,
we don't have it yet, but to potentially have
a full understanding of how addic addiction works.
Good. So, so sometimes we need the uh reports
of addicts. Just to get sort of straight on
what the sort of. So The addict will experience
things like. Complete demoralization. Over the fact that he
or she is trying to stop using, but they
can't do it. They'll experience guilt and shame. These
are things that you might see from the outside
if you're a sensitive therapist or observer, but you
might not see them until you talk to the
addicts about how they're feeling. So it's a kind
of a, a holistic psychological drama that they're part
of. And you, what you would only see from
the outside where you're gonna watch the addict. IS
very puzzling behavior. Like, why do they keep doing
this? Why do they keep screwing things up? Why
do they keep undermining their own plans? You would
see all that, but you wouldn't know about the
psychological turmoil that's inside the addict, uh, himself. The
other reason you want the addict's testimony, I'll give
you an example. So in the. In the uh
what's called the big book of Alcoholics Anonymous. Uh,
WHICH was written in the 1930s, published in 1939,
I believe, yeah. Um, THE, uh, there's a preface
by a doctor, Doctor Silkworth, and he says, he
talks about craving. And he says this, he says,
craving occurs after the alcoholic takes the first drink.
Now, he was not himself an alcoholic. Alcoholics actually
realized that it does take place after the first
drink, but it actually also takes place before the
first drink. So it's very, very common for alcoholics
to say that they've been thinking all day about
using at 5 o'clock. They've just been waiting till
they get off the clock at work, and that
they're craving, craving, craving all the time. In fact,
they might say, my mind is completely absorbed with
my desire for using the drug. Um, AND, uh,
that's something that Doctor Silkworth wasn't picking up on.
Uh, HE didn't see that there's craving, uh, uh,
in various, various places. There's also the reasons because
addicts can help you understand. Why they use? Now
There are models, and again, they've usually been developed
by non-addicts for why people are addicts. So one
is a trauma model. Roughly the idea would be,
ah, if someone's an addict, they must have been
traumatized in their childhood. Another model Is related but
different. It's a self-medication model. It says, ah, if
a person is abusing drugs, it must be because
they needed some medication to control, and now you
start to fill in the blanks, anxiety, depression, bipolar
disorder, schizophrenia. General, any, you know, any kind of
feeling that is uncomfortable, the thought is, so that's
the self-medication hypothesis. Then there's a third one that's
also a totalizing one, which is something called the
social dislocation hypothesis. This comes in very dramatic forms.
It says, if you live in a culture which
is where there is social displacement and upheaval caused
by global capitalism, that causes addiction. Now, these are
all sort of highly general, and what you, but
what I think is they're all true, a little
bit of certain groups. There are people who fit
all three descriptions. I've met them all, but they
don't get into the particularities of particular cases, and
there are lots of people who are addicts who
are not traumatized in any way. I, for example,
was not, I grew up in a very good
family, a loving family, so nothing about trauma fits
me. Um, SURE. I did use to self-medicate a
little bit cause I was anxious, maybe, and I
found alcohol good for that. Plus, but even then,
I don't know if that's the best explanation, because
I was taught, like all boys my age, that,
you know, when you get to high school, you
start drinking. Girls like you better if you drink.
You're socially more adept if you drink. And, you
know, there's a whole romantic story that was associated
with it. It's very, it wasn't like a, a
problem to be solved. It was something to enhance.
It was a little bit like people talk about,
you know, neural enhancement or it was an enhancer.
Um, SO I think that what we get from
addicts is really the particular features that are idiosyncratic
to different people. And, uh, you know, as I've
talked about in the book, One of, one thing
about addictions is that most a plurality of addicts,
substance abusers have some comorbidity that would be diagnosed
as a psychiatric problem. Now, this doesn't mean, of
course, cause psychiatric problems are a little bit loosey-goosey
in terms of how they're identified um itself. So
we don't always know. I mean, so is it,
is it, you know, is anxiety a psychiatric problem
or is it just like an ordinary problem of
living? Uh, I don't know what the answer to
that is. Uh, BUT clearly, but what, but for
example, if we take something like bipolar disorder, bipolar
disorder only affects about 4 to 5% of the
population. But among people with bipolar disorder, 50% at
least are alcoholic, and another 10% become addicted to
other drugs. So that's an astronomically high rate among
a group. So clearly, something's going on there. And
we don't want to, you know, make glib inferences
to say, ah, this alcoholic, let's look for bipolar,
we want to be careful there, but, or this
is a bipolar person. Uh, WE might worry though
about them if they're vulnerable to addiction. And same
thing with schizophrenia, uh, very, very high addiction rates
in these comorbid cases. So again, getting the particular
features of the own person's psychology might help explain
and help them understand the role that their drug
of choice, at least at the beginning, was being
used for. Usually what happens is, whatever you're using
your drug for in the beginning, it comes not
to work for that anymore, but by then you
are, as we say, addicted.
So related to my previous question, this one I
think gets into issues that are usually discussed within
the philosophy of science. Tell us about subjective realism
and the expanded natural method in this case applied
to understanding addiction, but you can also talk about
it more generally.
Good. Yeah. So I developed, uh, so back in
the 90s when I was working primarily on consciousness,
um, I was struck in those times, it was
the early years of, um, uh, uh, people thinking,
OK, what's gonna be the relationship between the mind
and the brain? And, uh, uh, you know, a
certain group of people thought, well, what will happen
is we'll get a straightforward reduction of mental states.
So we'll find out eventually, anxiety is this little
squiggle squaggle in the brain, depression is another squiggle
squaggle of a different sort. Um, AND we'll get
rid of the psychological vocabulary and reduce it to,
um, a neural vocabulary. And, but what I thought
right at, at the beginning was that the right
way to think about the consciousness brain problem is
not as the deep metaphysical problem, not as the
hard problem of consciousness, but as an epistemic problem.
So what happened is that and this is what
I call subjective realism. It's basically that Mother Nature,
in the case of organisms like us, designed us
so that each of us has Our own and
only our own mental states. This is why there
is the problem of other minds. So Ricardo has
his mental states, and I have, Owen has his
mental states, and my wife has her mental states,
and my dog has his mental states, and our
mental states are private, but they also have a
public face because we make facial expressions, we're interacting
with other people, and so on and so forth.
But there's no mystery why subjectivity occurs to the
individual who is having Her experiences, it's because only
we are hooked up to ourselves in the right
sort of way to have the conscious experiences that
we have. So, I, so I think now that
there's still this epistemic gap because it means that
I'm in touch first personally with my mental state
as conscious experiences. I'm not in touch with their
neural texture at all. I have no idea what
neurons are involved in what you and I are
doing right now. Although I assume that my brain
is doing all the stuff it does when it's
speaking language, comprehending language, looking at another human being,
all those areas are active. What the neuroscientists can
then do though, if, if the neuroscientist is interested,
they could tell us what is going on at
those lower levels, and that could be valuable because
suppose all of a sudden I wake up tomorrow
and I can't, you know, read a certain letter
of the alphabet. Well, that happens sometimes when people
have strokes. So a neuroscientist might be able to
tell us exactly where in Stanislaus Dehay's letterbox part
of the brain. That something happened that dropped out,
or the same, the same way in which if
you have a, a stroke in which you lose,
you know, ability in your, to move your right
hand, they know exactly where to look in left
motor cortex, left side of your brain, uh, because
we now know how moving your hand is related
to certain set of neurons there. Now, so I,
I think what we want to do is coordinate
the neuroscience with the psychology, the phenomenology. We also
are not in touch with what causes us to
have the mental states, and many of the things
that cause us to have the mental states we
have are outside of us. They're social features, they're
features of our early childhood training, their habits that
we formed inside a culture. There are emotional norms
and scripts that we have. That are distinctive of
our culture and that we're raised up in. So
the idea of the, so the idea of subjective
realism is this idea that look at, you really
do have the mental states you have. They're not,
they're not only neural states, they have a subjective
side to them. And only you are positioned to
report them, we hope, accurately as the mental states
they are. But in order to understand you as
a person, we need to bring the resources of
The neurosciences, psychology, sociology, anthropology to bear to understand.
The person. So it's the general method which I
developed for the purposes of understanding consciousness, uh, and
I now think, not surprisingly, that it applies in
the case of Addiction, which, like many, many other
states, is partly conscious, but partly hidden. But it's
not only hidden in the brain, like what the
brain is doing in reward centers, say, it's also
hidden in terms of its social and cultural history,
your family history. We don't see all that. So
we need people to help us understand what the
social As it were, causes of addiction are as
well, and that takes us outside the brain and
the body.
So in the book, you distinguish between three different
addiction types. So there's the, the willing addicts, the
unwilling addicts, and the resigned addicts. Why do you
think that it matters to distinguish between these different
types of addiction?
Good. Well, I think that the more we know,
so let me, I'll say something about how to
define these three and then maybe, uh, then I'll
connect it to why it matters. So, uh being
a philosopher, of course, we think that distinctions can
matter, sometimes they don't, but this is the case,
I think, where they do. So for example, So,
uh, one reason they matter actually is that they
matter because of what previous people, distinctions previous people
have made which are not helpful. So, for example,
in the philosophical literature, Harry Frankfurt introduced, uh, who's
a great philosopher, recently deceased a couple of years
ago, um, Frankfurt introduced this picture of what he
called the willing addict. And it is a cartoon
that actually doesn't fit very well, so what Frankfurt
said. AND, and he's interested in will, willpower, and
so on and so forth. So in one of
his important papers on uh Will, where Frankfurt's model
is basically the idea that things that are part
of really me are things that I That if,
my desires that have passed inspection as good desires
are ones that are part of my freely given
self. So he pictures a willing addict, like, let's
say, um, someone who just gets up in the
morning and thinks, My God, I'm so rich. I
have my, I, I can get my designer drugs
from my, you know, the person who goes out
and gets them for me, they're medical grade marijuana.
I'm very careful. I mean, by, by the way,
both Michael Jackson and Prince had such doctors, right?
Um, WHO provided them with what they thought were
the perfect admixtures of drugs. Um, AND he, and,
and so Frankfurt pictures the willing addict as someone
who just has their life set up so that
they have no ambivalence whatsoever about their addiction. They
love their addiction, their addiction loves them. Maybe their
loved ones aren't suffering at all from their addiction
because they're doing it so perfectly well. Carl Hart,
for example, who's a great psychologist and neuroscientist, uh,
at Columbia, I believe he's still at Columbia. He's
written some good books on addiction, and he, uh,
says of himself that he's a recreational heroin smoker.
And so just like my father used to come
home from New York City and uh have 2
martinis before dinner. Uh, AND, uh, that served a
certain ritualistic function in my family of origin. Carl
Hart comes home after a hard day, and he
smokes heroin. Um, SO supposing he's. He says he's
not a heroin addict. Let's hold that aside for
now. But he smokes it regularly, and that would
be an example of, suppose he were an addict,
of a willing person. He's figured out how to
do it and it's working out fine for him.
Um, THE trouble is, those are hard to find.
They're almost no, in, in, in all the literature
I've read, There are some addicts who are in
that vicinity, like Keith Richard may have been that
way in his part of his life, he was
a heroin addict, he says. Um, BUT there are
almost no addicts who are willing but are not
ambivalent. They're usually some ambivalence because they'll, they, even
a willing addict will notice that he desires the
drug at inconvenient times, like when he's playing with
his children. He might need more heroin. Um, SO,
but the, but the reason to, so that's one,
so just to clarify what the phenomenon is, like
it's not quite no ambivalence, it's usually some ambivalence
of a willing addict. The other reason to, uh,
mark off willing addicts though, is that Nora Volkoff,
uh, who is the head of the National Institute
of Drug Addiction Abuse in America. She says there
are no willing addicts and and and then she
uh another time says, I've never met a willing
addict. But I have met willing addicts. I guess
I know more addicts than Nora Volca does. But
the point is there are people who say, look,
I'm OK with this. Now, but that's not the
largest group of addicts. The largest group of addicts
are what I call unwilling or resigned addicts. UNWILLING
addicts, I was one for a long time. Um,
I didn't want to be addicted anymore. It wasn't
doing any of the good stuff it did for
me when it was working. Um, IS stop doing
that, and that's very, very common, but you still
need to keep taking your drug, and partly this
is due to the fact that the physiological Addiction
has, as it were now, your body is entirely,
it tolerates the drug amount that you were taking.
It needs that amount every day or it starts
to have, you know, uh, bad effects, heart effects,
cardiac effects, uh, mood effects, craving effects. Um, BUT
the addict can't see, find a way out. So
that makes you an unwilling addict. You want out,
but you can't find a way out. And many
of those people do end up in meetings of
Alcoholics Anonymous or other groups, and they eventually find
their way out. They become Well, depending on the
way one describes these things, they either become former
addicts or they become addicts that don't use anymore.
That's an interesting separate question. Resigned addicts though, are
people who, they've tried again and again usually, and
they just can't get it and they've thrown in
the towel. So they're just resigned to the fact
that they'll never stop. Sometimes they're wrong about that.
So I talk in the book about a program,
and I, I think this is where the Portugal
harm reduction programs, the harm reduction programs also in
certain American and Canadian states. Um, HAVE operated. They
try to be especially help. The resigned addicts and
maybe even help the unwilling addicts find a way.
That's more successful. So here, so one of the
programs I talked about, um, you know this, but
your listeners won't. So there's a group in Amsterdam,
uh, it's called the Rainbow Group, and what they
do is they take Older men Who usually no
longer have a family around them, might live in
rooming houses, and they drink all the time. They
might live under bridges. Um, BUT the city in
this program, this NGO, um, offers them jobs cleaning
up parks. And when they arrive at work in
the morning, so it's also a harm reduction technique,
they are given a pint or two of beer.
Because they're alcoholic. They need beer. They need a
maintenance dose of beer. It's just like giving heroin
addicts methadone or something like that. Um, SO you
give them beer for breakfast. Uh, THEY work cleaning
up the parts, you give them beer for lunch,
and at the end of the day, you give
them beer before they go off. They also get
cigarettes, I think, if they're addicted to cigarettes. And
they get paid a small amount of money. I
mean, not a crazy uh minimum wage, but a
minimum wage. Um, AND the thought is this accomplishes
something that the culture needs accomplished, clean parks. It
helps the addicts because it provides for them for
free like methadone would, the drug that they're resigned
to using forever. It seems to have effects on
them moderating to some extent. Some don't moderate, but
some find that, oh, I can spread this out
over the course of the day, I didn't know
that. And so if they go home and they
drink more at night, it might not be as
much as usual. They're also accountable, so if they
don't show up for work, they get fired. So
the whole idea is to create a system which
humanely and compassionately accepts that there might really be
some resigned addicts who've lost everything, including self-respect and
self-esteem, who you can help make their lives safer
for them, help build up self-respect and self-esteem, get
a social, uh, need met. That's the idea. And
I think dividing people into those groups can help
us understand better what kind of person we're dealing
with and what, what our social policies are aimed
at. Right.
But would you say that willing addicts suffer from
a disorder?
It's a good question. Yeah, it's a really good
question. Um, YEAH, because if you endorse what you
are doing, uh, then you might just say, that's
an addiction, that's not like a disorder. I mean,
so I'm open to that. The, the thing I
would say is that in my experience, even most
you have to be Most willing addicts. HAVE a
certain kind of impunity that tends to come from
being really rich and being able to live outside
the normative structure of society. I mean, you know,
that's why Keith Richard is one example of that.
But in my experience, usually when you find people
who are, you know, major drug abusers violating the
norms of drugs all over the place, um, you'll
find them, uh, among people who have a certain
kind of I mean, we have this trial going
on, which is a tragic trial with Sean Diddy
Combs, you know, who's now in America is a,
a rap, uh, star, and it looks like he
had was able to set up a life because
he's so rich with things like security services, people
who got his drugs probably they were pure. They
were tested ahead of time. Maybe he even avoided
addiction. This is a kind of different kind of
case. I'm not saying there was addiction involved, but
there was vast amounts of, uh, violation of norms
that involve substances, sex, and everything else, but he's
able to pull it off at the best hotels
because he is rich as God. That, that tends
to be, uh, a location for willing, willing addicts.
So it's not that common. Right.
When it comes to the ethics of addiction earlier,
we've already talked about, um, we talked about basically
social stigma and how people, I mean, to what
extent we should stigmatize addicts or to what extent
we should even use the word addict. Um, BUT
another kind of question. ETHICAL question has to do
with responsibility. Is the addict responsible for their own
behavior or not? And more generally, what kinds of
questions surrounding responsibility are to be had in regards
to addiction?
Good. So, this is again where I think that
uh in, in our attempt to think humanely about
addiction, we've gone overboard in the other direction. So,
Let's start again with things like, uh, uh, uh,
type one diabetes. A person is not responsible for
having one type having type one diabetes. Now, once
a person has type one diabetes, then they will
immediately have to do things that the doctor will
recommend. The individual has to do those things. So,
you know, they are responsible as it were for
doing them. So even diseases, you res you have
responsibilities to kick it. Now, the, the, the, there,
there are several different locations in which we could
ask about an addict's responsibility. So we could ask,
for example, uh, is an addict responsible for acquiring
an addiction? And the answer to that will depend.
So some people, um, Uh, uh, are, say, you
know, trafficked, say, young people are who are trafficked,
uh, uh, for sex or for other reasons. Uh,
SOMETIMES, uh, they are introduced to drugs on purpose
to get them dependent on the, um, uh, person
who's trafficking them. Um, SO that's not an addiction
for which the, the person who acquires it is
responsible. Um, uh, NONETHELESS, uh, uh, for many addicts,
uh, uh, there are, um, some, you know, sort
of social, um, their educational, um, Things that make
them aware of the danger. So we might want
to say, well, you know, if along the way,
if you grow up in a culture which was
warning you about alcoholism in a useful way, and
you became one anyway, well, then you weren't, we
would say things like, you should have been paying
more attention. Those are various kinds of low-level responsibility
attributions and so on and so forth. But once
there's the water under the bridge and the and
the attic is an addict, that is, they're in
the grip, and they have, you know, at least
6 to 11 of the, they meet 6 to
11 of the symptoms or criteria in DSM-5 and
are an addict, then the question is, well, what
next? Now, um, what, there are a couple of
observations I make first. One is the observation that
when addicts get together and talk about undoing their
addiction, they're trying. Imagine people who are just trying
so far unsuccessfully, so they're unwilling addicts. They almost
always think that they've got to figure something out
themselves to do with their addiction. There they realized
their own agency is involved in undoing what they
now have as a problem. Um, AND they're seeking
help from other people to model their behavior on
these other people. They need help, but they realize
that they have to do something themselves or some
things themselves. So often, of course, some, some of
it is low hanging fruit. People are told, Well,
don't hang around with the people you use with
all the time. That's like one thing you should
start doing. Hanging around with people who don't use
that's another thing you should start doing. So these
are, these are ways of taking responsibility for oneself,
for oneself. Um, uh, IS the addict responsible if
he neglects his children? Everybody says yes. He, we
might be, be more sympathetic or compassionate to the
addict than we are to someone else because we
think his agency is in some sense undermined or
diminished, but it's not missing altogether. And almost all
the research shows this, that addicts do control using
all the time. They don't, they try not to
use at work, they try not to use in
front of people who will disapprove of them. They
schedule using, uh, to certain times and places. So
there's already a lot of agency that addicts maintain,
and they realize that they've got to leverage this
agency further if they want to get out of
the vicious cycles that they're in. So, the answer
is they're responsible, uh, they're responsible, and, uh, are
they fully, you know, Uh, do they have like
complete control of all aspects of the behavior? No,
but they don't have that for a lot of
things. They can't fly and so on and so
forth. But, um, addicts have responsibility and I think
that every treatment program that's successful. Treats addicts as
if they have responsibility. So I mentioned, you know,
the Rainbow Group in Amsterdam, if they don't show
up for work, they get fired. If you're in
a therapeutic community, Hannah Picard, uh, who has a
book coming out in a year, you want to
talk to her, called The Puzzle of Addiction. Uh,
Hannah worked in, um, uh, therapeutic communities in England
with addicts. And in those therapeutic communities, everybody lives
together, um, and the addicts are not allowed to
use. And if they don't, if they use, there
are consequences. They lose certain privileges, for example. They
can't go out. So, there are always consequences, um,
and these consequences, I think, uh, show that their
expectations which are reasonable, that can be placed on
addicts, and often addicts place these expectations on themselves.
So, I have one last question or one last
topic that I would like to explore with you
today in regards to addiction. So among the treatments
that are currently available, which are the best ones?
And I would like also to hear from you
about the method used by Alcoholics Anonymous. Does it
work or not?
OK. So good. So this is what, you know,
one of the things in the book that I
do, as you know, is I um suggest that
um we need to be careful, um, so, so
several things. OK. So some people distinguish between two
large classes of addictions. On the one hand, there
are substance addictions. Which are to like what we're
assuming today, we're, that's what I talk about mostly
in the book, um, to familiar substances like amphetamines,
uh, alcohol, heroin, cocaine. Uh, SOME people think there
is cannabis addiction, some people think there isn't. Um,
um, THEN there's food. Of course, food is a
really complicated, it's a substance, but we don't think
that, for example, you can abstain from food, which
is the technique that Alcoholics Anonymous uses. Um, AND
so, one of the things I recommend is you
need to focus substance by substance on the needs
of, uh, as it were, detoxing people and making
them adjust again. So, um, uh, then there are
behavioral addictions, of course, things like sex addiction, gambling
addiction. Uh, SOME people think there's addiction to your
phone, probably is. Um, SOCIAL media addictions. Uh, ANYWAY,
I'm not talking about those. The, um, With respect
to drugs, as I said at first, there's not,
even though since 1997, there's been this motto out
there that addiction is a brain disease and it
matters, there actually isn't one brain disease that has
identified by anyone. Anyone. That is addiction. Now what
there is, though, with respect to, for example, cocaine.
There's a lot of research on the way in
which one set of neurotransmitters get really ramped up,
and those are mostly in the dopamines. There's everybody
hears about the dopamine system. Um, HOWEVER, dopamine is
less involved with alcohol and it's less involved with
opiates. So there isn't like one sort of type
of neurotransmitter even to. Uh, THING. So with respect
to, uh, addictions, we need to go one by
one. OK, so let's start with opioids. So if
a person is a heroin addict or a fentanyl
addict, Or OxyContin prescription drug addicts, there's lots of
those. It, it looks like it's a smart idea
not to ask people to abstain completely. Especially at
first, but instead to take a substitute opioid like
methadone or uh buprenorphine, those are both themselves opiates,
but they have less hedonic effect than heroin or
fentanyl. When I say hedonic, not only won't you
feel happy, joy, joy, click your heels, but you
also won't space out if you take these at
the right doses. So you'll, you'll be present for
life. Now, the reason these are important is that,
that if you are addicted to opiates, And you
have a relapse after a month and take what
you used to take, the amount might kill you
because your body has quickly Unraveled your tolerance. So,
if you go back out after taking heroin and
use the same amount of heroin, then you actually
might, your respiration might stop. And that's why we
have drugs like Narcan to wake you up again.
But it's a serious problem, and a lot of
overdoses occur when Opiate addicts go back out. So
these are very useful drugs for um uh people
with opioids. Uh, AND, and what that means in
part is that like, so you, you may or
may not know this, but Alcoholics Anonymous. Often has,
it has offshoots, so there are places called Narcotics
Anonymous. There's even Cocaine Anonymous I've seen around. There's
so those sometimes will gather people together who are
trying to get the same kind of help that
Alcoholics Anonymous gives, but for different drugs. But also
in the rooms of Alcoholics Anonymous, nowadays, many, many
people use other drugs besides alcohol. So you'll have
heroin addicts who are also alcoholic, uh, and many
people will introduce themselves that way. Um, SO that
means that, that Alcoholics Anonymous, which says that you
need to abstain from alcohol, isn't as useful to
opioid addicts because they need to take an opioid,
at least for a while till they know they're
safe and clear, and those are the substance opioids.
Um, THERE are some other, so those two drugs,
as well as there's some other drugs which also
help with um blocking opioid receptors, things like naltrexone,
Corosate, naloxone. Those can be, all of those drugs
in weird ways seem to have effects that diminish
craving also for alcohol. That's a side effect as
they say that they have. Now, that's interesting because
that means that they probably should be prescribed more
for alcoholics to again help them through. The early
stages of, if they want to not use at
all, to not use. So there's a whole bunch
of drugs now. They all, don't treat a disease,
they treat craving, which is a effect. No, craving
isn't the addiction. Craving is a consequence of becoming
addicted. Uh, BUT those are, those are increasingly good
drugs. And, and you may have read, um, recently
that these Ozemppec and these other weight loss drugs.
That are being used, which uh uh what they
do is they control a peptide uh called GLP
one. Uh, METABOLICALLY gets, gets into the brain, but
people who take that also claim that they have
less desire for other drugs of addiction, which is
an interesting and important result. So that would yet
be another drug that people could take, not for
diabetes or weight loss, but to diminish desire for,
uh, addictive drugs. So that's an area where we
should expect there to be Um, uh, more and
more development of drugs or more recognition of the
usefulness of these drugs, uh, to help people sustain
recovery. Because, as you know, some people define addictions
as a chronic and relapsing disease, but not everybody
relapses.
Right. So that's all very interesting and very informative
and the book is again, what is it like
to be an addict, understanding substance abuse. Of course,
I'm leaving a link to it in the description
below. And Doctor Flanagan, where can people find your
work on the internet if they're interested?
Uh, I'm, I'm old fashioned. There's almost no place
to find. You just have to go on Amazon
and buy the book. Um.
No, that's perfectly fine. So, uh, as I said,
I will be leaving a link to it and
thank you so much again for taking the time
to come on the show. It's always a big
pleasure to talk with you.
Wonderful. Thank you so much. 01 plug I should
give in terms of getting in touch with me.
For the next 2 years, I will be teaching
at NYU Abu Dhabi. So, uh, if there are
people who want in that part of the world
who would like me to talk about addiction. Or
uh in Europe, I'll be close by, um, uh,
for the next few years.
Great Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview
until the end. If you liked it, please share
it, leave a like and hit the subscription button.
The show is brought to you by Nights Learning
and Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com
and also please consider supporting the show on Patreon
or PayPal. I would also like to give a
huge thank you to my main patrons and PayPal
supporters Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche
Olaf, Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim
Hollis, Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then
the Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in
Holbrookfield governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro
and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel
Curriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran
David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono
Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb
medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams,
the Acosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
Old Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray,
Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander
Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John
Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin. And yoursnacht, a special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.